## What is scanning

- Scanning is the step which helps to test a system based on the info we gathered.
- *Scanning* : is a technique that allows for a deep dive into a system to seek out valuable data and services in an IP address range. Scanning techniques locate potential entry points on a system to exploit.
- It refers to the package of techniques or procedures used to identify hosts, ports and various services within a system.

## Why do we do scanning

- It helps to identify HOST's system info in detail like :
     - *Operating System*
     - *Service version*
- To discover open ports
- To discover live systems

## Network Scanning

- *Network Scanning* is the procedure of identifying active hosts, ports and the services used by the target application.
- There are many kinds of scanning methods and tools for different purpose :
     1. For network mainly : *Nmap*, *netdiscovery*
     2. For subdomains : *Sublist3r*, *subfinder*, *amass* 
     3. For websites : *Nuclei*, *Nessus*, *Acunitix* ....

### Nmap - network mapper
- *Nmap* is an open-source network exploration tool that expedites auditing and scanning to allow users to better understand the network around them.
- Its primary purpose is to *explore networks* and *perform security audits*. 
- With Nmap, users can : 
     - effortlessly discover hosts and services on a computer network 
     - detect operating systems 
     - identify open ports 
     - collect information about different network devices.
- It is made for windows and Linux and is built in on kali Linux.
- To check the existence of Nmap on your system : *nmap  --version*

### Live System Discovery
- Discovering live system means, checking up running hosts on a network.
- To understand more check this website https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/fsmmn?topic=discovery-system 
- We check host using *ping sweep*.

### Ping Sweep 
- This is a method of checking if host is up or down.
- It uses *ICMP* ( internet control message protocol ) packets for checking purpose.
- It sends *Echo request* and waits for response if there is *echo reply* then the system is up.
- Check this website https://www.techtarget.com/searchnetworking/definition/ping-sweep-ICMP-sweep 

- From echo request we can gather the following information :
     1. *OS type* 
         - if it is Windows 
             - bytes sent are = *32* bytes
             - the *ttl* (time to live) is = *108*
         - if it is Linux
             - bytes sent are = *64* bytes
             - the ttl is = *64* 
     2. *Connection stability* 
         - Time

#### Nmap ping sweep
- We can perform ping sweep using nmap too.
- Syntax : 
     -  *nmap  -sn  IP*               sn = no port scan
- Using nmap we can scan a whole range of Ip addresses.
- Syntax :
     -  *nmap  -sn  gatewayIp-255*   Ex. 192.168.10.0-255
     -  *nmap  -sn  CIDR notation*    Ex.  192.168.10.0/24
##### Note
- Network bits depend on the IP class
- This will not work on Virtual machines network. 

##### Warning
1. When doing ping sweep it is detectable so you might get caught.
2. Some organizations or system admins, block any ICMP requests so the ping sweep won't work, it will show you "host is down" when host is up.
     - To make it work we just escape some options.
     - Syntax : 
         -  *nmap  -Pn  IP* 
     - This method will jump the host discovery because it will take the IP as up and try to do port discovery.

## What is PORT

- *Port* is process-specific or an application-specific construct serving as a communication endpoint, which is used by the Transport layer protocol of Internet protocol suite, such as TCP and UDP.
- To understand about ports check the link :
     - https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/what-is-ports-in-networking/

### Port status
- Ports can be on different status :
     1. *Open ports* 
         - These are ports open for accepting any requests.
     2. *Closed ports*
         - These are ports which are not accepting any request but there is some service running on them.
     3. *Filtered ports* 
         - These are ports which nmap is not sure of being open or closed.

### Open port discovery
- On some system ports can be open for some purpose. 
     - Ex. When you access websites there is port *80* and *443* are open.
     - if you are getting some shell activity port *22* is open.
##### Note
- The problem is there are some ports open without intention, this leads to attack.

- We can use nmap to check which port is open/closed and this is called *port discovery*.
- Syntax : 
     -  *nmap  IP*  =>  scans only the known 1000 ports
     -  *nmap  -p  port1,port 2,.....  IP*   =>  scans only ports 1,2 
     -  *nmap  -p-  IP*  =>  scans all 65000 ports

##### Note
- We can use *netcat* :   
- Syntax :   
     -  *nc  -nv   IP  port* 

## Scanning methods

- Nmap scans networks in different modes

### 1. TCP connect ( TCP scan )
- TCP is best for connection oriented things and it is reliable because it uses *3-way handshake*.
- To understand 3-way handshake check this website : 
     - https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/tcp-3-way-handshake-process/
- So, nmap will send *SYN* request to the ports and if they reply with *SYN/ACK* nmap will reply with *ACK* and the port is open. Else the port is closed/filtered.
- Syntax :
     -  *nmap  -sT  IP*

### 2. TCP SYN ( Stealth scan )
- This is TCP scan but here we don't send the last *ACK* flag but we send the *RESET* flag.
- Syntax : 
     -  *sudo nmap  -sS  IP* 

### 3. UDP scan
- This is a method to scan if any service/port is using UDP.
- It is a slow process. (check the picture on the course lecture)
- Syntax : 
     -  *sudo nmap  -sU  IP*
##### Note
- When you do pen-tests do both UDP and TCP scans together.
- Syntax :
     -  *nmap  -sU  -sS  -sV   10.129.10.3*

### 4. Xmas scan
- Here the first thing to send is FIN/PSH/URG instead of SYN.
- If there is response like RST flag then the system is close.
- If there is no response the system is open.
- Syntax :
     -  *sudo  nmap  -sX  IP*
- understanding Xmas scan check this links : 
     - https://nmap.org/book/scan-methods-null-fin-xmas-scan.html
     - https://cyberpedia.reasonlabs.com/EN/xmas%20scan.html

### Operating system detection
- Nmap have a feature to detect the operating system of the host.
- Syntax : 
     -  *sudo nmap  -O  IP*     =>   OS detection only
     -  *sudo nmap  -A  IP*      =>   OS detection including version

#### Websites to understand scan types
1. https://www.techtarget.com/searchnetworking/tip/Types-of-Nmap-scans-and-best-practices
2. https://medium.com/@secureica/nmap-scanning-techniques-f919b7507801
3. https://www.professormesser.com/nmap/optimizing-your-nmap-scan-nmap-scanning-methods/
4. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/port-scanning-techniques-by-using-nmap/


### Scan Speeds
- When nmap scans, it has a time waiting, after sending 1 packet to the host.
- There are 5 time waiting.
- The nmap time template is *-T<0-5>* 

#### 1. Insane -T5
- Sending packets insanely fast and waits only *0.3* seconds for the response.
- It scans super fast but accuracy is sacrificed sometimes.
- Nmap gives up on the host if it couldn't complete the scan within 15 minutes.
- It should only be used on a fast network and high end systems as sending packets this fast can affect the working of the network or systems and can result in system failure.
- Syntax :
     -  *nmap  -T5  IP* 

#### 2. Aggressive -T4
- This template is used for sending packets very fast and waits only *1.25* seconds for the response.
- Nmap recommends using *-T4* for "reasonably modern and reliable networks".
- Syntax :
     -  *nmap  -T4  IP* 

#### 3. Normal -T3
- This is the default nmap timing
- Syntax :
     -  *nmap  -T3  IP* 

#### 4. Polite -T2 and Sneaky -T1
- These are the slowest timing.
- Being slow helps to not be detected on some risky projects.
- Syntax :
     -  *nmap  -T2  IP*
     -  *nmap  -T1  IP* 

### Nmap Script Engine ( NSE )
- Nmap is capable of running some script on ports and services.
- These scripts are written in lua - programming language.
- These scripts are located in  */usr/share/nmap/scripts*.
- Nmap contains 589 scripts (version 7.70), there are a lot of scripts that are useful but not all of them work perfectly.
- You can write your own script too if you can do *lua* 
- Syntax :
     -  *nmap  -sC  IP*
     -  *nmap  --script  scriptname.nse  IP*
     -  Nmap  -p 22  --script  ssh*  IP
- Check this website : https://nmap.org/book/man-nse.html 

#### Some known scripts
1. --script banner
     - A simple banner grabber which connects to an open TCP port and prints out anything sent by the listening service within five seconds.
2. --script broadcast
     - perform tasks such as detecting drop box listeners, sniffing to detect hosts, and discovering MS SQL and NCP servers, among many other things.
     - reveals broadcast info.
3. --script vuln
     - executes all NSE scripts that focus on identifying vulnerabilities in the target system you are scanning. It is an easy way to discover well-known vulnerabilities.
#### Links for common NSE
- https://www.stationx.net/nmap-scripts/
- https://research.securitum.com/nmap-and-12-useful-nse-scripts/

### Nmap outputs
- Nmap can save your output using the "-oG | -oX | -oN"
     -  -oG  =>  for greppable formats
     -  -oX  =>  for xml formats
     -  -oN  =>  for normal saving formats
     - Ex.  *nmap 10.10.10.10  -oG  test* 
- You can also add *-v* to show verbose results in detail.
     -  -v   =  little detail
     -  -vv  =  more detail
     -  -vvv =  much more detail